.. _gdal_mdim_pipeline:

================================================================================
``gdal mdim pipeline``
================================================================================

.. versionadded:: 3.14

.. only:: html

    Process a multidimensional dataset applying several steps.

.. Index:: gdal mdim pipeline

Description
-----------

:program:`gdal mdim pipeline` can be used to process a mdim dataset and
perform various processing steps that accept mdim and generate mdim.

For pipelines mixing mdim and vector, consult :ref:`gdal_pipeline`.

Most steps proceed in on-demand evaluation of blocks,
unless otherwise stated in their documentation, without "materializing" the
resulting dataset of the operation of each step.

.. NOT IMPLEMENTED YET
.. It may be desirable sometimes
.. for performance purposes to proceed to materializing an intermediate dataset
.. to disk using :ref:`gdal_mdim_materialize`.

Synopsis
--------

.. program-output:: gdal mdim pipeline --help-doc=main

A pipeline chains several steps, separated with the `!` (exclamation mark) character.
The first step must be ``read`` or ``mosaic``, and the last one ``write``, ``info`` or ``compare``.
Each step has its own positional or non-positional arguments.
Apart from ``read``, ``mosaic``, ``info`, ``info`` or ``compare``,
all other steps can potentially be used several times in a pipeline.

Potential steps are:

* read

.. program-output:: gdal mdim pipeline --help-doc=read

Details for options can be found in :ref:`gdal_mdim_read`.

* compare

.. program-output:: gdal mdim pipeline --help-doc=compare

Details for options can be found in :ref:`gdal_mdim_compare`.

* mosaic

.. program-output:: gdal mdim pipeline --help-doc=mosaic

Details for options can be found in :ref:`gdal_mdim_mosaic`.

* reproject

.. program-output:: gdal mdim pipeline --help-doc=reproject

Details for options can be found in :ref:`gdal_mdim_reproject`.

* info

.. program-output:: gdal mdim pipeline --help-doc=info

* write

.. program-output:: gdal mdim pipeline --help-doc=write

Details for options can be found in :ref:`gdal_mdim_write`.

GDALG output (on-the-fly / streamed dataset)
--------------------------------------------

A pipeline can be serialized as a JSON file using the ``GDALG`` output format.
The resulting file can then be opened as a multidimensional dataset using the
:ref:`raster.gdalg` driver, and apply the specified pipeline in a on-the-fly /
streamed way.

The ``command_line`` member of the JSON file should nominally be the whole command
line without the final ``write`` step, and is what is generated by
``gdal mdim pipeline ! .... ! write out.gdalg.json``.

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "type": "gdal_streamed_alg",
        "command_line": "gdal mdim pipeline ! read in.nc ! reproject --output-crs=EPSG:32632"
    }

The final ``write`` step can be added but if so it must explicitly specify the
``stream`` output format and a non-significant output dataset name.

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "type": "gdal_streamed_alg",
        "command_line": "gdal mdim pipeline ! read in.nc ! reproject --output-crs=EPSG:32632 ! write --output-format=streamed streamed_dataset"
    }


Substitutions
-------------

It is possible to use :program:`gdal pipeline` to use a pipeline already
serialized in a .gdal.json file, and customize its existing steps, typically
changing an input filename, specifying an output filename, or adding/modifying arguments
of steps.

See :ref:`gdal_pipeline_substitutions`.


Nested pipeline
---------------

.. include:: gdal_cli_include/gdal_nested_pipeline_intro.rst

See :ref:`gdal_nested_pipeline`.

.. Return status code
.. ------------------

.. include:: return_code.rst

Examples
--------

.. example::
   :title: Reproject a netCDF file to CRS EPSG:32632 ("WGS 84 / UTM zone 32N") and write it as Zarr

   .. code-block:: bash

        $ gdal mdim pipeline ! read in.nc ! reproject -r cubic --output-crs=EPSG:32632 ! write out.zarr --overwrite
