=head1 NAME

Geo::OGR - A part of the Perl interface to the GDAL library.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Geo::GDAL;

=head1 ABSTRACT

This module is a part of the Perl bindings to the GDAL library. The
GDAL modules allows you to access and manipulate from Perl all
geospatial data that the installed GDAL library is configured to
read/write.

=head1 STATUS

This module is beta quality. As most of the names and calling
conventions come directly from the underlying GDAL library they are
quite stable and will continue to work like the do now. However, many
things could, should, and will be made more perlish.

Generally, those methods which are documented, have been tested. If
the method or constructor you are looking for is not documented,
perhaps there is another way of doing what you want to do.

=head1 PACKAGE METHODS

Note: some arguments are optional and have a default value. This is
illustrated like this:

SomeMethod(arg1, arg2 = 4);

arg1 is a required argument and an example or a variable with illustrative
name is given

arg2 is optional and if left off, will get the value 4 (in this case)

=over

=item CreateGeometryFromWkb

=item CreateGeometryFromWkt

=item CreateGeometryFromGML

=item GetDriverCount

=item GetOpenDSCount

=item SetGenerate_DB2_V72_BYTE_ORDER

=item RegisterAll

  Done by default.

=item GetOpenDS

=item Open

  $datasource = Geo::OGR::Open('directory', $update = 0);

=item OpenShared

=item GetDriverByName

=item GetDriver

=back

=head1 CONSTANTS

Access as $Geo::OGR::<constant>

=over

=item wkb25Bit

=item wkbUnknown

=item wkbPoint

=item wkbLineString

=item wkbPolygon

=item wkbMultiPoint

=item wkbMultiLineString

=item wkbMultiPolygon

=item wkbGeometryCollection

=item wkbNone

=item wkbLinearRing

=item wkbPoint25D

=item wkbLineString25D

=item wkbPolygon25D

=item wkbMultiPoint25D

=item wkbMultiLineString25D

=item wkbMultiPolygon25D

=item wkbGeometryCollection25D

=item OFTInteger

=item OFTIntegerList

=item OFTReal

=item OFTRealList

=item OFTString

=item OFTStringList

=item OFTWideString

=item OFTWideStringList

=item OFTBinary

=item OJUndefined

=item OJLeft

=item OJRight

=item wkbXDR

=item wkbNDR

=item OLCRandomRead

=item OLCSequentialWrite

=item OLCRandomWrite

=item OLCFastSpatialFilter

=item OLCFastFeatureCount

=item OLCFastGetExtent

=item OLCCreateField

=item OLCTransactions

=item OLCDeleteFeature

=item OLCFastSetNextByIndex

=item ODsCCreateLayer

=item ODsCDeleteLayer

=item ODrCCreateDataSource

=item ODrCDeleteDataSource

=back

=head1 CLASSES

=head2 Geo::OGR::Driver

=over

=item name

  $driver->{name}

=item CreateDataSource

  $datasource = $driver->CreateDataSource('directory', 
    $options = []);

=item CopyDataSource

=item Open

=item DeleteDataSource

=item TestCapability

=item GetName

=back

=head2 Geo::OGR::DataSource

=over

=item GetRefCount

=item GetSummaryRefCount

=item GetLayerCount

  $n = $datasource->GetLayerCount;

=item GetName

=item DeleteLayer

=item CreateLayer

  $layer = $datasource->CreateLayer('layer_name', 
    $spatial_reference = undef, 
    $geom_type = $Geo::OGR::wkbUnknown, $options = []);

layer_name is typically a filename without directory and extension or
table name.

=item CopyLayer

=item GetLayerByIndex

  for $i (0..$datasource->GetLayerCount-1) {
    $layer = $datasource->GetLayerByIndex($i);
  }

=item GetLayerByName

  $layer = $datasource->GetLayerByName('layer_name');

layer_name is typically a filename without directory and extension or
table name.

=item TestCapability

=item ExecuteSQL

  $sql = "select * from spatial_data_table";
  $layer = $datasource->ExecuteSQL($sql);

=item ReleaseResultSet

  $datasource->ReleaseResultSet($layer);

Do this for all layers that have been obtained with ExecuteSQL.

=back

=head2 Geo::OGR::Layer

=over

=item GetRefCount

=item SetSpatialFilter

=item SetSpatialFilterRect

  @rect = ($minX, $minY, $maxX, $maxY);
  $layer->SetSpatialFilterRect(@rect);

=item GetSpatialFilter

=item SetAttributeFilter

=item ResetReading

  $layer->ResetReading;
  while ($f = $layer->GetNextFeature()) {
    ...
  }

=item GetName

=item GetFeature

  $feature = $layer->GetFeature($i);

=item GetNextFeature

  See above.

=item SetNextByIndex

=item SetFeature

=item CreateFeature

  $layer->CreateFeature($feature);

=item DeleteFeature

=item SyncToDisk

  $layer->SyncToDisk;

=item GetLayerDefn

  $schema = $layer->GetLayerDefn();

=item GetFeatureCount

  $n = $layer->GetFeatureCount;

=item GetExtent

=item TestCapability

=item CreateField
  
  $column = new Geo::OGR::FieldDefn('my_field', 
    $Geo::OGR::OFTInteger); # an example
  $layer->CreateField($column);

=item StartTransaction

=item CommitTransaction

=item RollbackTransaction

=item GetSpatialRef

=item GetFeatureRead

=back

=head2 Geo::OGR::Feature

  $feature = new Geo::OGR::Feature($schema);

=over

=item GetDefnRef

=item SetGeometry

  $feature->SetGeometry($geom);

=item SetGeometryDirectly

=item GetGeometryRef

  $geom = $feature->GetGeometryRef;

=item Clone

=item Equal

=item GetFieldCount

=item GetFieldDefnRef

=item GetField

  $value = $feature->GetField($field);

$field is either name or index.

=item IsFieldSet

=item GetFieldIndex

=item GetFID

=item SetFID

=item DumpReadable

=item UnsetField

=item SetField

  $feature->SetField($field, $value);

$field is either name or index.

=item SetFrom

=item GetStyleString

=item SetStyleString

=item GetFieldType

=back

=head2 Geo::OGR::FeatureDefn (Schema)

=over

=item GetName

=item GetFieldCount

  $n = $schema->GetFieldCount()

=item GetFieldDefn

  $column = $schema->GetFieldDefn($i)

=item GetFieldIndex

=item AddFieldDefn

=item GetGeomType

=item SetGeomType

=item GetReferenceCount

=back

=head2 Geo::OGR::FieldDefn (Column)

  $column = new Geo::OGR::FieldDefn('name', $Geo::OGR::OFTxxxx);

=over

=item GetName

=item GetNameRef

=item SetName

=item GetType

=item SetType

=item GetJustify

=item SetJustify

=item GetWidth

=item SetWidth

=item GetPrecision

=item SetPrecision

=item GetFieldTypeName

=back

=head2 Geo::OGR::Geometry

  $type = $Geo::OGR::wkbPolygon; # an example
  $geom = new Geo::OGR::Geometry($type);

=over

=item ExportToWkt

=item ExportToWkb

=item ExportToGML

=item AddPoint

  $geom->AddPoint($x, $y, $z = 0);

=item AddGeometryDirectly

=item AddGeometry

  $geom->AddGeometry($another_geom); 

For example add a LinearRing to a Polygon.

=item Clone

=item GetGeometryType

=item GetGeometryName

=item GetArea

=item GetPointCount

  $n = $geom->GetPointCount;

=item GetX

  $x = $geom->GetX($i);

=item GetY

  $y = $geom->GetY($i);

=item GetZ

=item GetGeometryCount

=item SetPoint

=item GetGeometryRef

=item GetBoundary

=item ConvexHull

=item Buffer

=item Intersection

=item Union

=item Difference

=item SymmetricDifference

=item Distance

=item Empty

=item Intersect

=item Equal

=item Disjoint

=item Touches

=item Crosses

=item Within

=item Contains

=item Overlaps

=item TransformTo

=item Transform

  $geom->Transform($transformation);

=item GetSpatialReference

=item AssignSpatialReference

=item CloseRings

  $geom->CloseRings;

Defined only for LinearRings.

=item FlattenTo2D

=item GetEnvelope

=item Centroid

=item WkbSize

=item GetCoordinateDimension

=item GetDimension

=back

=head1 KNOWN BUGS

The reference counting scheme is not yet implemented. Make sure that
parents are not deleted before their children! Use "my" a lot.  Do not
give undefined/uninitialized variables to methods.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Geo::GDAL>(3pm), L<Geo::GDAL::Const>(3pm), L<Geo::OSR>(3pm).

http://www.gdal.org

=head1 AUTHORS

The GDAL bindings team (in alphabetical order):

ari.jolma at tkk.fi
cfis at interserv.com
hobu at iastate.edu
kruland at ku.edu
warmerdam at pobox.com

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright 2005-2006 by the GDAL bindings team.

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Library General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
License along with this library; if not, write to the 
Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, 
Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA.
