.. _testing:

.. include:: ../substitutions.rst

================================================================================
Automated testing
================================================================================

GDAL includes a comprehensive test suite, implemented using a combination of Python (via pytest) and C++ (via gtest).

After building GDAL using CMake, the complete test suite can be run using ``ctest -v --output-on-failure``. This will automatically set environment variables so that tests are run on the
the built version of GDAL, rather than an installed system copy.

Running a subset of tests using ``ctest``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The complete set of test suites known to ``ctest`` can be viewed running ``ctest -N``.

A subset of tests can be run using the ``-R`` argument to ``ctest``, which selects tests using a provided regular expression.
For example, ``ctest -R autotest`` would run the Python-based tests.

The ``-E`` argument can be used to exclude tests using a regular expression. For example, ``ctest -E gdrivers`` would exclude the suite of driver tests.

Running a subset of tests using ``pytest``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The test subsets exposed by ``ctest`` are still rather large and some may take several minutes to run.
If a higher level of specificity is needed, ``pytest`` can be called directly to run groups of tests or individual tests.
Before running ``pytest``, it is important to set environment variables so that the development build of GDAL is tested,
rather than a system version. This can be done by sourcing the following from the build directory:

.. code-block:: bash

    . ../scripts/setdevenv.sh

(with adjustments to the above path if the build directory is not a subdirectory of the GDAL source root).
To verify that environment variables were set correctly, you can check the version of a GDAL binary:

.. code-block:: bash

    gdalinfo --version
    # GDAL 3.7.0dev-5327c149f5-dirty, released 2018/99/99 (debug build)

and the Python bindings:

.. code-block:: bash

    python3 -c 'from osgeo import gdal; print(gdal.__version__)'
    # 3.7.0dev-5327c149f5-dirty

Tests can then be run by calling ``pytest``, for example on an individual file.
On Linux and MacOS builds, the tests are symlinked into the build directory, so this
can be done by running the following from the build directory:

.. code-block:: bash

    pytest autotest/gcore/vrt_read.py

On Windows, the test files remain in the source tree, but the pytest configuration file ``pytest.ini`` is only available in the build directory. To accommodate this, the above command would be modified as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    pytest -c pytest.ini ../autotest/gcore/vrt_read.py

A subset of tests within an individual test file can be run by providing a regular expression to the ``-k`` argument to ``pytest``.

.. code-block:: bash

    pytest autotest/gcore/vrt_read.py -k test_vrt_read_non_existing_source

``pytest`` can also report information on the tests without running them. For
example, to list tests containing "tiff" in the name:

.. code-block:: bash

    pytest --collect-only autotest -k tiff


.. warning:: Not all Python tests can be run independently; some tests depend on state set by a previous tests in the same file.


Checking for memory leaks and access errors using Valgrind
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The GDAL unit test suite can be run using the Valgrind tool to detect memory
errors such as leaks and incorrect reads/writes.

The test suite will run considerably slower under Valgrind (perhaps by a factor
of ten) so it is generally advisable to run a subset of the tests using the
methods described above.

.. warning:: Calling ``valgrind ctest`` will _not_ run the tests under
   ``valgrind``. Although it is possible to use Valgrind with ctest, it is
   simpler to call ``pytest`` or ``gdal_unit_test`` directly.

The following preparatory steps are necessary to avoid numerous false-positive
errors from Valgrind:

1. Many false-positive errors are generated by Python itself. Most of these can be
   removed by obtaining a suppression file that corresponds to the version of
   the Python interpreter used to run the tests. This file can be located in a
   source distribution of Python, or downloaded directly from GitHub (for
   example, at
   https://raw.githubusercontent.com/python/cpython/3.11/Misc/valgrind-python.supp)

2. A few false-positive errors are generated by the GDAL test suite or
   libraries that it uses (e.g., SWIG, numpy). These can be removed by
   ``autotest/valgrind-gdal.supp`` file in the GDAL repository.

3. When running Python unit tests, the default system memory allocator should
   be used instead of Python's internal memory allocator. This can be done by
   setting the ``PYTHONMALLOC`` environment variable to ``malloc``.

4. When running Python unit tests, Valgrind will report numerous "Invalid file
   descriptor" warnings that cannot currently be suppressed. These can be
   removed from the output using ``grep -v "invalid file
   descriptor\|alternative log fd"``.

Combining the following, we can run valgrind for a subset of Python tests as
follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    PYTHONMALLOC=malloc valgrind \
        --leak-check=full \
        --suppressions=/home/dan/dev/valgrind-python.supp \
        --suppressions=/home/dan/dev/gdal/autotest/valgrind-gdal.supp \
        pytest -v autotest/utilities 2>&1 | (grep -v "invalid file descriptor\|alternative log fd" || true) | tee valgrind-out

.. note:: To avoid verbose commands such as the one above, it may be useful to
   reference the suppression files and other common arguments in a
   ``~/.valgrindrc`` file.


Recommendations on how to write new tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Python-based tests should be preferred when possible, as productivity is higher
in Python and there is no associated compilation time (compilation time affects
feedback received from continuous integration).

C/C++-based test should be reserved for C++-specific aspects that cannot be tested
with the SWIG Python bindings, which use the C interface. For example testing
of C++ operators (copy/move constructors/assignment operators, iterator interfaces,
etc.) or C/C++ functionality not mapped to SWIG (e.g. CPL utility functions/classes)

Python tests
------------

Python tests use the `pytest <https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/>`__
framework since :ref:`rfc-72`.

Test cases should be written in a way where they are independent from other
ones, so they can potentially be run in a isolated way or in parallel of other
test cases. In particular temporary files should be created with a name that
cannot conflict with other tests: preferably use pytest's ```tmp_path`` fixture <https://docs.pytest.org/en/7.1.x/how-to/tmp_path.html#the-tmp-path-fixture>`__.

Use ``@pytest.mark.require_driver(driver_name)`` as an annotation for a test
case that requires an optional driver to be present.

Use ``pytestmark = pytest.mark.require_driver("driver_name")`` towards the
beginning of a test file that requires a given driver to be available for
all its test cases. This is typically when writing tests for a particular
driver.

Use ``@pytest.mark.require_run_on_demand`` as an annotation to signal a test
that should not be run by default, typically because it requires special
pre-conditions, use a lot of RAM, etc. and is thus not appropriate to be
automatically run by continuous integration.

Use ``@pytest.mark.parametrize(...)`` as an annotation for test functions
that test for variations, instead of for() constructs.
More details at https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/parametrize.html

e.g.:

.. code-block:: python

    @pytest.mark.parametrize("dt,expected_size", [(gdal.GDT_Byte, 1),
                                                  (gdal.GDT_UInt16, 2)]
    def test_datatypesize(dt,expected_size):
        assert gdal.GetDataTypeSizeBytes(dt) == expected_size

instead of

.. code-block:: python

    def test_datatypesize_DO_NOT_DO_THAT():
        for dt, expected_size in [(gdal.GDT_Byte, 1), (gdal.GDT_UInt16, 2)]:
            assert gdal.GetDataTypeSizeBytes(dt) == expected_size


`Fixtures <https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/how-to/fixtures.html>`__ can
be used to share set-up and tear-down code between test cases.

e.g. a fixture automatically loaded for all test cases of a test file, that
takes care to unregister a given driver before the test case is run, and
re-register it afterwards:

.. code-block:: python

    @pytest.fixture(scope="module", autouse=True)
    def without_filegdb_driver():
    # remove FileGDB driver before running tests
    filegdb_driver = ogr.GetDriverByName("FileGDB")
    if filegdb_driver is not None:
        filegdb_driver.Deregister()

    yield

    if filegdb_driver is not None:
        print("Reregistering FileGDB driver")
        filegdb_driver.Register()

or a fixture that runs preliminary checks to discover if a driver has
some optional capabilities, and skip a test case if not:

.. code-block:: python

    @pytest.fixture()
    def require_auto_load_extension():
    if ogr.GetDriverByName("SQLite") is None:
        pytest.skip()

    ds = ogr.Open(":memory:")
    with gdaltest.error_handler():
        sql_lyr = ds.ExecuteSQL("PRAGMA compile_options")
    if sql_lyr:
        for f in sql_lyr:
            if f.GetField(0) == "OMIT_LOAD_EXTENSION":
                ds.ReleaseResultSet(sql_lyr)
                pytest.skip("SQLite3 built with OMIT_LOAD_EXTENSION")
        ds.ReleaseResultSet(sql_lyr)

    def test_ogr_virtualogr_1(require_auto_load_extension):
        # Invalid syntax
        assert not ogr_virtualogr_run_sql("CREATE VIRTUAL TABLE poly USING VirtualOGR()")

C++ tests
---------

GDAL C++ tests use the `GoogleTest <https://github.com/google/googletest>`__
framework since :ref:`rfc-88`.

Common non-failing assertions are: ``EXPECT_TRUE(cond)``, ``EXPECT_FALSE(cond)``,
``EXPECT_EQ(a, b)``, ``EXPECT_NE(a, b)``, ``EXPECT_STREQ(a, b)``, ``EXPECT_LE(a, b)``,
``EXPECT_LT(a, b)``, ``EXPECT_GE(a, b)``, ``EXPECT_GT(a, b)``, ``EXPECT_NEAR(a, b, tolerance)``
If one of those assertions fail, the execution of the rest of the test cases
continues, hence they should not typically be used if testing a pointer against
NULL and dereferencing it unconditionally afterwards. The ASSERT_xxxx family
of assertions should be used for such cases where early exit of the test case
is desired.

GoogleTest also offers capabilities for parametrized tests. For example:

.. code-block:: c++

    class DataTypeTupleFixture:
            public test_gdal,
            public ::testing::WithParamInterface<std::tuple<GDALDataType, GDALDataType>>
    {
    public:
        static std::vector<std::tuple<GDALDataType, GDALDataType>> GetTupleValues()
        {
            std::vector<std::tuple<GDALDataType, GDALDataType>> ret;
            for( GDALDataType eIn = GDT_Byte; eIn < GDT_TypeCount; eIn = static_cast<GDALDataType>(eIn + 1) )
            {
                for( GDALDataType eOut = GDT_Byte; eOut < GDT_TypeCount; eOut = static_cast<GDALDataType>(eOut + 1) )
                {
                    ret.emplace_back(std::make_tuple(eIn, eOut));
                }
            }
            return ret;
        }
    };

    // Test GDALDataTypeUnion() on all (GDALDataType, GDALDataType) combinations
    TEST_P(DataTypeTupleFixture, GDALDataTypeUnion_generic)
    {
        GDALDataType eDT1 = std::get<0>(GetParam());
        GDALDataType eDT2 = std::get<1>(GetParam());
        GDALDataType eDT = GDALDataTypeUnion(eDT1,eDT2 );
        EXPECT_EQ( eDT, GDALDataTypeUnion(eDT2,eDT1) );
        EXPECT_GE( GDALGetDataTypeSize(eDT), GDALGetDataTypeSize(eDT1) );
        EXPECT_GE( GDALGetDataTypeSize(eDT), GDALGetDataTypeSize(eDT2) );
        EXPECT_TRUE( (GDALDataTypeIsComplex(eDT) && (GDALDataTypeIsComplex(eDT1) || GDALDataTypeIsComplex(eDT2))) ||
                (!GDALDataTypeIsComplex(eDT) && !GDALDataTypeIsComplex(eDT1) && !GDALDataTypeIsComplex(eDT2)) );

        EXPECT_TRUE( !(GDALDataTypeIsFloating(eDT1) || GDALDataTypeIsFloating(eDT2)) || GDALDataTypeIsFloating(eDT));
        EXPECT_TRUE( !(GDALDataTypeIsSigned(eDT1) || GDALDataTypeIsSigned(eDT2)) || GDALDataTypeIsSigned(eDT));
    }

    INSTANTIATE_TEST_SUITE_P(
            test_gdal,
            DataTypeTupleFixture,
            ::testing::ValuesIn(DataTypeTupleFixture::GetTupleValues()),
            [](const ::testing::TestParamInfo<DataTypeTupleFixture::ParamType>& l_info) {
                GDALDataType eDT1 = std::get<0>(l_info.param);
                GDALDataType eDT2 = std::get<1>(l_info.param);
                return std::string(GDALGetDataTypeName(eDT1)) + "_" + GDALGetDataTypeName(eDT2);
            }
    );


Test coverage reports
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

GDAL continuous integration has a ``coverage`` configuration that builds
GDAL with the ``gcov`` GCC module to get the line coverage of running Python
and C++ autotest tests.

This is used by the `Coveralls GitHub Action <https://github.com/marketplace/actions/coveralls-github-action>`__
to upload results to https://coveralls.io/github/OSGeo/gdal, for both push
and pull requests events.

A somewhat nicer looking output of line coverage results for the latest master
build, generated by ``lcov``, is also available at
https://gdalautotest-coverage-results.github.io/coverage_html/index.html
