.TH "gdal_translate" 1 "13 Apr 2006" "GDAL" \" -*- nroff -*-
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
gdal_translate \- gdal_translate
converts raster data between different formats
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.PP
.PP
.nf
gdal_translate [--help-general]
       [-ot {Byte/Int16/UInt16/UInt32/Int32/Float32/Float64/
             CInt16/CInt32/CFloat32/CFloat64}] [-not_strict]
       [-of format] [-b band] [-outsize xsize[%] ysize[%]]
       [-scale [src_min src_max [dst_min dst_max]]]
       [-srcwin xoff yoff xsize ysize] [-projwin ulx uly lrx lry]
       [-a_srs srs_def] [-a_ullr ulx uly lrx lry] [-a_nodata value]
       [-gcp pixel line easting northing]*
       [-mo "META-TAG=VALUE"]* [-quiet] [-sds]
       [-co "NAME=VALUE"]*
       src_dataset dst_dataset
.fi
.PP
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
The gdal_translate utility can be used to convert raster data between different formats, potentially performing some operations like subsettings, resampling, and rescaling pixels in the process.
.PP
.IP "\fB\fB-ot\fP:\fP" 1c
For the output bands to be of the indicated data type. 
.IP "\fB\fB-not_strict\fP:\fP" 1c
Be forgiving of mismatches and lost data when translating to the output format. 
.IP "\fB\fB-of\fP \fIformat\fP:\fP" 1c
Select the output format. The default is GeoTIFF (GTiff). Use the short format name. 
.IP "\fB\fB-b\fP \fIband\fP:\fP" 1c
Select an input band \fIband\fP for output. Bands are numbered from 1 Multiple -b switches may be used to select a set of input bands to write to the output file, or to reorder bands. 
.IP "\fB\fB-outsize\fP \fIxsize[%] ysize[%]\fP:\fP" 1c
Set the size of the output file. Outsize is in pixels and lines unless '' is attached in which case it is as a fraction of the input image size. 
.IP "\fB\fB-scale\fP \fI[src_min src_max [dst_min dst_max]]\fP:\fP" 1c
Rescale the input pixels values from the range \fIsrc_min\fP to \fIsrc_max\fP to the range \fIdst_min\fP to \fIdst_max\fP. If omitted the output range is 0 to 255. If omitted the input range is automatically computed from the source data. 
.IP "\fB\fB-srcwin\fP \fIxoff yoff xsize ysize\fP:\fP" 1c
Selects a subwindow from the source image for copying based on pixel/line location.  
.IP "\fB\fB-projwin\fP \fIulx uly lrx lry\fP:\fP" 1c
Selects a subwindow from the source image for copying (like -srcwin) but with the corners given in georeferenced coordinates.  
.IP "\fB\fB-a_srs\fP \fIsrs_def\fP:\fP" 1c
Override the projection for the output file. The srs_def may be any of the usual GDAL/OGR forms, complete WKT, PROJ.4, EPSG:n or a file containing the wkt.  
.IP "\fB\fB-a_ullr\fP \fIulx uly lrx lry\fP:\fP" 1c
Assign/override the georeferenced bounds of the output file. This assigns georeferenced bounds to the output file, ignoring what would have been derived from the source file. 
.IP "\fB\fB-a_nodata\fP \fIvalue\fP:\fP" 1c
Assign a specified nodata value to output bands. 
.IP "\fB\fB-mo\fP \fI'KEY=VALUE'\fP:\fP" 1c
passes a metadata key and value to set on the output dataset if possible. 
.IP "\fB\fB-co\fP \fI'NAME=VALUE'\fP:\fP" 1c
passes a creation option to the output format driver. Multiple \fB-co\fP options may be listed. See format specific documentation for legal creation options for each format. 
.IP "\fB\fB-mo\fP \fI'META-TAG=VALUE'\fP:\fP" 1c
Add the indicated metadata values to the output dataset. 
.IP "\fB\fB-gcp\fP \fIpixel line easting northing\fP:\fP" 1c
Add the indicated ground control point to the output dataset. This option may be provided multiple times to provide a set of GCPs.  
.IP "\fB\fB-quiet\fP:\fP" 1c
Suppress progress monitor and other non-error output. 
.IP "\fB\fB-sds\fP:\fP" 1c
Copy all subdatasets of this file to individual output files. Use with formats like HDF or OGDI that have subdatasets. 
.IP "\fB\fIsrc_dataset\fP:\fP" 1c
The source file name. 
.IP "\fB\fIdst_dataset\fP:\fP" 1c
The destination file name. 
.PP
.SH "EXAMPLE"
.PP
.PP
.PP
.nf
gdal_translate -of GTiff -co "TILED=YES" utm.tif utm_tiled.tif
.fi
.PP
.SH "AUTHORS"
.PP
Frank Warmerdam <warmerdam@pobox.com>, Silke Reimer <silke@intevation.de> 
