.TH "gdal_merge.py" 1 "7 Aug 2005" "Doxygen" \" -*- nroff -*-
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
gdal_merge.py \- mosaics a set of images 
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.PP
.PP
.PP
.nf

gdal_merge.py [-o out_filename] [-of out_format] [-co NAME=VALUE]*
                     [-ps pixelsize_x pixelsize_y] [-separate] [-v] [-pct]
                     [-ul_lr ulx uly lrx lry] [-n nodata_value] [-init value]
                     [-ot datatype] input_files
.PP
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
This utility will automatically mosaic a set of images. All the images must be in the same coordinate system and have a matching number of bands, but they may be overlapping, and at different resolutions.
.PP
.IP "\fB\fB-o\fP \fIout_filename\fP:\fP" 1c
The name of the output file to be created. 
.IP "\fB\fB-of\fP \fIformat\fP:\fP" 1c
Output format, defaults to GeoTIFF (GTiff).  
.IP "\fB\fB-co\fP \fINAME=VALUE\fP:\fP" 1c
Creation option for output file. Multiple options can be specified.  
.IP "\fB\fB-ot\fP \fIdatatype\fP:\fP" 1c
Force the output image bands to have a specific type. Use type names (ie. Byte, Int16,...)  
.IP "\fB\fB-ps\fP \fIpixelsize_x pixelsize_y\fP:\fP" 1c
Pixel size to be used for the output file. If not specified the resolution of the first input file will be used. 
.IP "\fB\fB-ul_lr\fP \fIulx uly lrx lry\fP:\fP" 1c
The extents of the output file. If not specified the aggregate extents of all input files will be used. 
.IP "\fB\fP" 1c
.IP "\fB\fB-v\fP:\fP" 1c
Generate verbose output of mosaicing operations as they are done. 
.IP "\fB\fB-separate\fP:\fP" 1c
Place each input file into a separate \fIstacked\fP band.  
.IP "\fB\fB-pct\fP:\fP" 1c
Grab a pseudocolor table from the first input image, and use it for the output. Merging pseudocolored images this way assumes that all input files use the same color table.  
.IP "\fB\fB-n\fP \fInodata_value\fP:\fP" 1c
Ignore pixels from files being merged in with this pixel value.  
.IP "\fB\fB-init\fP \fIvalue\fP:\fP" 1c
Pre-initialize the output file with this value. However, it is not marked as the nodata value in the output file.  
.PP
.PP
NOTE: gdal_merge.py is a Python script, and will only work if GDAL was built with Python support.
.SH "AUTHORS"
.PP
Frank Warmerdam <warmerdam@pobox.com> Silke Reimer <silke@intevation.de> 
