Copyright 2011 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research. All rights
reserved.

Access and use of this software shall impose the following obligations
and understandings on the user. The user is granted the right, without
any fee or cost, to use, copy, modify, alter, enhance and distribute
this software, and any derivative works thereof, and its supporting
documentation for any purpose whatsoever, provided that this entire
notice appears in all copies of the software, derivative works and
supporting documentation. Further, UCAR requests that the user credit
UCAR/Unidata in any publications that result from the use of this
software or in any product that includes this software, although this is
not an obligation. The names UCAR and/or Unidata, however, may not be
used in any advertising or publicity to endorse or promote any products
or commercial entity unless specific written permission is obtained from
UCAR/Unidata. The user also understands that UCAR/Unidata is not
obligated to provide the user with any support, consulting, training or
assistance of any kind with regard to the use, operation and performance
of this software nor to provide the user with any updates, revisions,
new versions or "bug fixes."

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY UCAR/UNIDATA "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL UCAR/UNIDATA BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL,
INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING
FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE ACCESS, USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
