gdal/frmts/grib/degrib/*
------------------------

The degrib and g2clib source code are modified versions of code produced 
by NOAA NWS and are in the public domain subject to the following
restrictions:

http://www.weather.gov/im/softa.htm

DISCLAIMER The United States Government makes no warranty, expressed or 
implied, as to the usefulness of the software and documentation for any 
purpose. The U.S. Government, its instrumentalities, officers, employees, 
and agents assumes no responsibility (1) for the use of the software and 
documentation listed below, or (2) to provide technical support to users. 

http://www.weather.gov/disclaimer.php

 The information on government servers are in the public domain, unless 
specifically annotated otherwise, and may be used freely by the public so 
long as you do not 1) claim it is your own (e.g. by claiming copyright for 
NWS information -- see below), 2) use it in a manner that implies an 
endorsement or affiliation with NOAA/NWS, or 3) modify it in content and 
then present it as official government material. You also cannot present 
information of your own in a way that makes it appear to be official 
government information..

 The user assumes the entire risk related to its use of this data. NWS is 
providing this data "as is," and NWS disclaims any and all warranties, 
whether express or implied, including (without limitation) any implied 
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. In no 
event will NWS be liable to you or to any third party for any direct, 
indirect, incidental, consequential, special or exemplary damages or lost 
profit resulting from any use or misuse of this data.

 As required by 17 U.S.C. 403, third parties producing copyrighted works 
consisting predominantly of the material appearing in NWS Web pages must 
provide notice with such work(s) identifying the NWS material incorporated 
and stating that such material is not subject to copyright protection.